{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440
\fs28\b Week 6 Report: AI Assistant Design, API Flow, and Integration\b0\par
\par
\fs24\b 1. Introduction\b0\par
\fs23 This week focused on the design and integration of the AI Assistant in the CodeQuest learning platform. The goal of this feature was to provide students with direct help while they study lessons, solve exercises, and review coding concepts. Instead of forcing users to leave the platform and search externally, the AI Assistant keeps support inside the learning environment.\par
\par
The AI Assistant was designed as an educational helper rather than a generic chatbot. Its purpose is to explain lessons, summarize concepts, respond to study questions, and help users understand their mistakes. This week’s work included the frontend assistant interface, backend API route, session handling, contextual prompt construction, and external AI provider communication.\par
\par
\b 2. Purpose of the AI Assistant\b0\par
The AI Assistant improves the learning experience by giving students immediate support at the point where they need it. In a platform like CodeQuest, students often get stuck on a lesson explanation, a coding task, or a quiz question. Without built-in support, this breaks the learning flow. The assistant solves that problem by acting as an embedded study guide.\par
\par
Its educational roles include explaining lessons in simpler terms, answering student questions about current topics, summarizing technical concepts, helping users review quiz mistakes, and generating follow-up practice guidance. This makes the assistant part of the teaching process. It does not just respond to free-form prompts. It responds using the student’s lesson and course context, which makes the answers more relevant and useful.\par
\par
\b 3. Frontend Interface and User Interaction\b0\par
The assistant interface is implemented in frontend/src/app/components/StudyAssistant.tsx. This component provides the main user interaction layer. It includes the assistant panel, message display area, chat history, input field, and quick prompt actions.\par
\par
The interface was designed to remain lightweight and easy to access. It can open when needed and stay hidden when the student is focused on content. This keeps the UI clean while still making support available immediately. The component manages open and close state, active tabs, loading state, input text, current messages, and saved history messages.\par
\par
In lesson mode, the assistant also offers quick prompts such as Explain this lesson, Give me a practice question, Summarize the topic simply, and Explain my last quiz mistake. This reduces friction because many students know they need help but do not know how to begin asking. The frontend also normalizes the assistant response so that markdown-like formatting is removed before display, producing clean plain text for readability.\par
\par
\b 4. Context Awareness and Personalization\b0\par
A major strength of the assistant is that it does not answer blindly. The frontend builds a structured context object in frontend/src/app/App.tsx and sends it with the user’s message. This context can contain the current application view, the student name, the selected course, course title, course description, lesson title, lesson content, and recent quiz outcomes.\par
\par
This means the assistant can respond according to what the student is currently learning. If the student is studying CSS selectors, the assistant can focus its answer on selectors rather than giving a generic explanation. If the student has just answered a quiz incorrectly, the assistant can explain that mistake. The system also generates a thread key such as a lesson-based key or course-based key so that conversations remain organized and do not mix unrelated topics.\par
\par
\b 5. Frontend to Backend Communication and API Flow\b0\par
The frontend does not call the AI provider directly. Instead, it sends requests to the project backend, which acts as the control layer between the user interface and the external AI API. This design keeps API keys secure and centralizes prompt handling.\par
\par
In StudyAssistant.tsx, the assistant sends a POST request to the backend as follows:\par
{\f1\fs20 const response = await fetch(apiBaseUrl + '/api/chat', \{\par
  method: 'POST',\par
  headers: \{\par
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',\par
    Authorization: 'Bearer ' + authToken,\par
  \},\par
  body: JSON.stringify(\{\par
    message: trimmed,\par
    context,\par
    threadKey,\par
  \}),\par
\});\f0\fs23}\par
\par
This request contains the student’s message, the learning context, and the thread key. On the backend, the request is received in back end/src/routes/chat.js:\par
{\f1\fs20 router.post('/', async (req, res) => \{\par
  const \{ message, context, threadKey \} = req.body || \{\};\par
\f0\fs23}\par
\par
After receiving the request, the backend identifies the user, loads or creates a chat session, retrieves recent message history, and prepares the AI prompt using the supplied learning context.\par
\par
\b 6. Backend AI Processing, Provider Call, and Response Return\b0\par
The backend defines a system prompt that shapes the assistant’s behavior. The prompt instructs the AI to behave as the CodeQuest study assistant, help students clearly and briefly, stay grounded in lesson and course context, and return plain text only. This is important because it keeps the assistant educational and avoids generic chatbot behavior.\par
\par
The system prompt is prepared in the backend in a form similar to the following:\par
{\f1\fs20 const systemPrompt = [\par
  'You are QUEST AI, the CodeQuest study assistant.',\par
  'Help students clearly and briefly.',\par
  'Prefer teaching, worked examples, and step-by-step explanations.',\par
  'Ground your answers in the lesson/course context when relevant.',\par
  'Suggest one short next practice step if helpful.',\par
  'Return plain text only.'\par
].join(' ');\f0\fs23}\par
\par
For the OpenAI provider, the backend then sends the request to the AI API:\par
{\f1\fs20 const response = await fetch('https://api.openai.com/v1/responses', \{\par
  method: 'POST',\par
  headers: \{\par
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',\par
    Authorization: 'Bearer ' + apiKey,\par
  \},\par
  body: JSON.stringify(\{\par
    model,\par
    instructions: systemPrompt,\par
    input,\par
  \}),\par
\});\f0\fs23}\par
\par
The backend supports multiple providers, including OpenAI, DeepSeek, and OpenRouter, which makes the system flexible for future deployment decisions. After receiving the reply from the provider, the backend stores the result in the user’s chat session and returns it to the frontend:\par
{\f1\fs20 res.json(\{\par
  reply,\par
  messages: session.messages,\par
\});\f0\fs23}\par
\par
The full flow is therefore: the user types a message in the assistant, the frontend sends it to /api/chat, the backend loads context and history, the backend calls the AI provider, the AI provider returns an answer, the backend stores the response, and the frontend displays the reply in the assistant panel.\par
\par
\b 7. Session Storage and Educational Value\b0\par
The assistant uses persistent session storage through a chat session database model. This allows users to revisit previous explanations and gives the assistant access to recent history for better continuity. The backend also exposes endpoints for loading history and clearing history, giving the user control over their conversations.\par
\par
Educationally, the AI Assistant adds significant value to the platform. Students can ask questions without leaving the lesson, receive simplified explanations, understand why their answer was wrong, and continue learning without breaking focus. This transforms CodeQuest from a static lesson platform into a more interactive and adaptive learning environment.\par
\par
\b 8. Challenges and Conclusion\b0\par
Several challenges had to be addressed during implementation. The first was response quality: AI systems often return answers that are too long, too advanced, or too heavily formatted. This was controlled through a strict backend system prompt and frontend response normalization. The second was context control: too little context makes the assistant generic, while too much context makes requests noisy and inefficient. The final design balances this by sending focused course and lesson information only.\par
\par
Another important design choice was keeping the AI provider behind the backend rather than exposing it directly in the browser. This protects API keys and allows the project to manage session storage, provider switching, and prompt construction centrally.\par
\par
Overall, this week’s work introduced a major educational feature into CodeQuest. The AI Assistant now functions as an embedded study tool that understands lesson context, communicates through a secure backend, stores session history, and returns beginner-friendly responses. This makes the learning experience more interactive, more supportive, and better suited to independent study.\par
}
